Welcome to JW Broadcasting®.
As Jehovah’s Witnesses,
we consider the Bible
a marvelous gift from our heavenly Father.
In the next hour,
we’ll deepen our appreciation for this gift.
We’ll learn how Jehovah
expresses his love through it
and how countless individuals
preserved its message.
We’ll learn how the Bible was written down
long before modern printing techniques
were invented.
Knowing God’s name is a privilege.
A humble man felt similarly,
which moved him
to produce the first English Bible
to consistently use Jehovah’s name.
And in our latest installment
of Truth Transforms Lives,
we’ll learn how Bible promises
led a deaf man who was an orphan
to find his heavenly Father
and spiritual family.
This is JW Broadcasting®!
Imagine you just learned
that you had received an amazing inheritance
—something very special
that had been in your family for many years.
And the gift is very valuable.
How would you feel?
Actually, all of us
—everyone listening to this program—
have received such an inheritance.
It’s something that’s been passed down
from generation to generation
for thousands of years.
What is it?
It’s God’s Word, the Bible.
Through this precious gift,
we feel Jehovah’s love.
In what ways?
Let’s consider three:
We feel it when we learn how Jehovah
has preserved his Word
for thousands of years
so that we’d have it today,
we feel it in the message it conveys
from our loving heavenly Father,
and we feel it when we see
how our lives are improved
when we apply its teachings.
Let’s talk about the first:
Jehovah’s love is felt
in the way that he preserved his Word.
The Bible was written so long ago
on perishable materials,
and yet we have it today.
We have it on our phones and tablets,
and we have printed copies.
Consider what a miracle it is
that Jehovah had the Bible written down,
hand copied for centuries,
and yet it was
accurately preserved until our day.
How was the Bible written?
In a miraculous way.
Second Timothy 3:16 clearly states:
“All Scripture
is inspired of God and beneficial.”
Yes, Jehovah used his holy spirit
to convey his thoughts
to the minds and hearts of faithful men.
Some 40 writers were used.
Sixteen hundred years passed
until the Bible was completed
in about the year 98 C.E.
That’s more than 1,900 years ago.
So how is it that we have the Bible today?
It had to be hand copied.
Through the centuries,
scribes made copies of the text.
For example, the Masoretes
—a group of meticulous
Jewish scholars and copyists—
literally counted the number of words
and even the number of letters.
Why?
To make sure that they
copied the text accurately.
They wanted no errors to be introduced.
Thankfully, many ancient Bible manuscripts
have survived until today
—perhaps some 6,000 manuscripts
of the Hebrew Scriptures
and some 5,000
of the Christian Greek Scriptures.
By the 15th century,
the Bible had been hand copied
for hundreds of years.
But now that was about to change.
Let me show you what happened,
using a few examples
from our Bible collection
in Warwick, New York.
This is what’s often called a Paris Bible.
It was completed in France
during the latter part of the 13th century,
that is, somewhere between
the years 1250 and 1300.
It’s a complete Bible copied by hand.
Look at how beautiful it is!
Imagine the work involved
—a scribe sitting at a table
day after day carefully copying
so that someone could have a Bible like this.
Of course, few people
would ever have been able to own
a precious hand-copied Bible like this one.
But Jehovah had something better in mind.
So in the 15th century,
a man named Johannes Gutenberg
came up with an amazing idea.
In about the year 1455,
Gutenberg produced the first printed Bible.
He printed only about 180 copies.
That doesn’t sound like a lot today, does it?
But remember:
Up until that time,
every Bible had been hand copied.
So this was something truly amazing!
Here’s an original page
from one of those 180 Bibles
printed by Gutenberg.
It’s beautiful, isn’t it?
But this was just the beginning.
In time,
Gutenberg’s invention would allow
for thousands of copies of the Bible
to be printed
in a relatively short period of time.
In the years that followed,
printing presses gradually
were set up in various cities in Europe.
What were they able to produce?
In 1475,
Bernhard Richel produced
this Bible in Basel, Switzerland.
Look at the size of it.
And look at the beautiful printing.
It’s amazing what those early printers
were able to produce!
Although the Bible was now being printed,
there was still a problem.
What was it?
Few people would ever
have been able to afford a Bible like this.
Even though it was printed,
it was still very expensive.
This Bible was probably produced for a church
or for someone who was very wealthy.
But less than 20 years later,
there was another exciting development.
This is the Biblia Integra,
often called the Poor Man’s Bible.
It was printed
in Switzerland in the year 1491.
What do you notice about it?
It’s very small.
It’s thought to be the first
small-size printed Bible.
The man who produced this Bible
had a new idea.
He produced this Bible
to appeal to common churchgoers.
It wasn’t a Bible for a library or a church.
It was for personal use,
something that a person could own
and carry with him and read at anytime.
Why was this development so important?
Because in the next few decades,
the Bible would be translated
from the original languages
and printed in the vernacular,
or common languages,
of people across Europe.
For the first time,
it would be possible for people
to have a personal copy of the Bible
in their own language.
These significant developments
in Bible production
give us reason to believe
that our loving Father,
Jehovah, was involved.
He not only had preserved the Bible
but now he was ensuring that his gift
would be made available to all people.
Now let’s return to the studio.
Of course,
God’s enemies did not want people
to have Jehovah’s precious gift.
Thus, it’s not surprising
that many people have actively worked
to prevent others from having the Bible.
One scholar, Albert Barnes,
described it this way:
“No book has excited
so much opposition as this;
“but it has survived every attack
“which power, talent,
and eloquence have ever made on it.
“No army ever survived
so many battles as the Bible.”
Humans alone could never
have preserved the Bible
in the face of such strong opposition.
It’s a miracle that we have it today.
Clearly, we feel the love of Jehovah
when we see how he’s preserved the Bible
and made this precious gift available to all.
The Bible’s message is a second way
that we feel Jehovah’s love.
The Bible teaches us things
that we cannot learn anywhere else.
True, without the Bible,
we could understand that there is a Creator
and we could learn about his qualities
from the things he’s made.
But the Bible teaches us so much more.
In it,
Jehovah tells us his own personal name,
the purpose of life,
and what the future holds.
These are things
that we’d expect a loving Father
to share with his beloved children.
And what’s more, Jehovah invites us
to have a close relationship with him.
What a tender and loving Father!
The practical guidance for life
that the Bible contains
is a third way that we feel Jehovah’s love.
It’s a book
from the Creator that instructs us
how to live a happy and satisfying life.
It’s like our owner’s manual
from the Creator himself.
And how much we need it!
Jesus saw how much people
needed that guidance.
Matthew 9:36 says:
“On seeing the crowds, he felt pity for them,
“because they were skinned and thrown about
like sheep without a shepherd.”
That’s true today also.
People are so confused and lost.
They don’t know what to do.
They’re often guided simply
by their own thinking and desires.
As a result,
people end up in awful situations.
We need reliable guidance
to show us what’s right and what’s wrong
and to help us find the way to happiness.
And Jehovah has provided all of that
in his precious gift, the Bible.
Romans 15:4 says:
“For all the things
that were written beforehand
“were written for our instruction,
“so that through our endurance
“and through the comfort from the Scriptures
we might have hope.”
Even as our circumstances change,
the Bible continues
to be our manual for life.
Whether young or old, single or married,
the guidance in God’s Word always applies.
It always works.
As we reflect on all the ways
that the Bible is a unique gift,
what do we see or feel?
We feel the tremendous love
that Jehovah has for us
in giving us this gift.
He’s made sure that all
the information we need is inside it.
And he helps us to apply it in our life.
With what result?
Second Timothy 3:16, 17 says:
“All Scripture is inspired of God
“and beneficial for teaching, for reproving,
“for setting things straight,
“for disciplining in righteousness,
“so that the man of God
may be fully competent,
completely equipped for every good work.”
What have we learned
in this brief discussion?
Everything about the Bible
reflects Jehovah’s love
—the miraculous way he preserved it,
its message from a loving Father,
and its practical guidance on how to live.
Inheriting a precious gift
does not guarantee
that we will appreciate it.
Likewise, simply having a Bible
does not mean that we’ll benefit from it.
To benefit,
we need to read his Word,
the manual for life, every day.
As we read and study the Bible,
we feel the great love of its Author,
our wonderful God, Jehovah.
And the more we feel his love,
the more we’re moved to do
what he wants us to do.
That includes helping others
to receive and benefit
from this precious gift.
In this way,
we can help as many
as possible to experience
—yes, to really feel—
the love of God through the Bible.
In ancient times,
Bible writers worked hard
to write down God’s Word.
But what techniques and materials
did they use?
Let’s explore some of those methods.
God inspired some 40 men to write the Bible.
But have you ever wondered,
‘What did they write it on?’
After all, the oldest portions of the Bible
were written more than 1,000 years
before the invention of what we know today
as paper.
The earliest Bible manuscripts
were written on a material called papyrus.
Papyrus is a plant
that grows in shallow water
with stalks that can reach almost 4.6 meters,
or about 15 feet, high.
Over 4,000 years ago,
the Egyptians invented ways to turn papyrus
into a smooth, strong writing material
similar to paper.
Even with modern tools,
you can see it was a lot of work.
Thin slices of the plant’s core
had to be soaked and flattened,
arranged in layers,
and then beaten and pressed
to bind the layers together.
When the sheets were dry,
they were polished with a piece of ivory,
a smooth shell, or even a stone.
The result
was a relatively smooth surface for writing.
To make a scroll,
individual sheets of papyrus
were pasted together along the edges
to make a roll that might be more
than 6 meters, or about 20 feet, in length.
But around the second century C.E.,
copyists began favoring a new technology
that made papyrus documents
much easier to use:
the codex.
With the codex,
the papyrus pages were folded,
sewn, and bound together
to form something similar to a modern book.
Think of all the hours required
to produce these materials to write on.
But without modern pens and pencils,
what did ancient people use to write with?
The pens they used were often made
from pieces of hard reed like this
that was carefully cut
to produce a pointed slit.
In Bible times, one common type of ink
that would be used with these reed pens
was made by combining black soot
with a rubbery gum
that helped it stick to the page.
Then, water was added to the mixture.
Whether in the form of a scroll or a codex,
the problem with papyrus
was that it decomposed easily.
Amazingly, there are many fragments
of Bible manuscripts on papyrus
that have survived down to our day.
What you see here
are reproductions of fragments
that are more than 2,000 years old.
In time, Bible manuscripts began to be copied
onto more durable materials.
By about the fourth century,
the most common of those was parchment.
It was normally made from the hides of sheep,
calves, or goats.
The process begins by soaking
the hide in water and lime,
then removing the hair and excess flesh.
After that, the skin is stretched on a frame
and scraped with a knife
to remove any residues like fat.
The next step is to dry the skin
under increased tension,
which causes it to become stiff and flat.
Finally, it’s dusted with chalk
and sanded smooth with pumice
to create an even writing surface.
As you can see,
making even one sheet of parchment
requires a tremendous amount of work.
But today there are many Bible manuscripts
that were written on parchment,
such as these two original manuscripts here.
Another famous manuscript
is the Codex Amiatinus,
located in Italy,
which is over 1,300 years old.
In fact, it’s the oldest complete Latin Bible
bound in a single volume ever found.
Some historians feel that it required
the hides of over 400 animals to produce.
This replica is big,
but the original is even larger.
It weighs 34 kilograms,
or about 75 pounds.
Think of all of the work
that went into producing just that one Bible.
Well, all of these materials
are perishable and deteriorate with time.
But to preserve his Word,
Jehovah God saw to it that the Bible
was meticulously copied and recopied
over the centuries,
so that today we have not just a few
but thousands of manuscripts
of various parts of the Bible.
So the next time you look up a Bible verse
by tapping on a link,
think about what it took
to put those words in writing
and how amazing it is that Jehovah’s Word,
recorded using these ancient,
fragile materials,
is still with us today.
We’re grateful
to the countless God-fearing men
who carefully wrote down
and copied the Bible.
Their hard work made it possible
for us to have it today,
thus fulfilling the words
of the prophet Isaiah:
“The word of our God endures forever.”
Our great God, Jehovah,
has used people from all walks of life
to preserve his message and holy name.
One such person was Benjamin Boothroyd,
the son of a humble shoemaker
who became a minister and a printer.
What caused this ordinary man
to become a self-taught scholar
and Bible translator?
Let’s find out.
“We sincerely congratulate Dr. B.
on having completed a task
“that was perhaps
never before accomplished
“by a single individual;
“namely, a corrected Hebrew text
of the Old Testament,
and a revised English version
of the whole Bible.”
Benjamin Boothroyd
was born in 1768 to a humble shoemaker.
He lived his whole life
in Yorkshire, England.
Boothroyd wasn’t wealthy or prominent;
yet, he accomplished something remarkable
in the field of Bible translation.
As a young man, Boothroyd and his friends
would attend church
and then go to a local alehouse
not dissimilar to this one.
It was on one of these occasions
that Boothroyd experienced something
that changed his life.
The conversation was unusually profane
and sinful in which I joined
and was perhaps worse
than any of my companions.
With the suddenness
of almost a flash of lightening,
my mind was struck with horror
under a sense of my sin and guilt
that I was a suitable victim
for the miseries of hell.
Without saying a word,
Boothroyd left the alehouse
and his companions behind.
As he walked home,
he got down on his knees
and begged God to have mercy on him.
It was a pivotal moment.
He resolved to dedicate
the rest of his life
to God.
We’re here at the National Library of Wales
to reveal the next chapter
of Boothroyd’s story.
In 1801, Boothroyd married Sarah Hurst,
who shared his devotion and faith.
To supplement their income,
the couple ran a small bookshop and printery.
It was there that Boothroyd
acquired these books:
Lectures on the Sacred Poetry of the Hebrews.
Lowth’s lectures on Hebrew poetry
fell into my hands.
I read it with peculiar pleasure.
Boothroyd fell in love
with the Hebrew language.
He decided to learn it.
But how?
Boothroyd noticed
that some of the psalms
were split into stanzas
using different Hebrew letters.
The names of the letters
I learned from the 119th Psalm,
and I began to read
the early part of the Pentateuch.
He painstakingly
taught himself Hebrew letters,
then words, then grammar
until he could read the Bible in Hebrew.
On comparing
the latest Hebrew printed texts,
such as these by Benjamin Kennicott,
with older available manuscripts,
Boothroyd discovered
something troubling:
It had many errors.
This led him to a monumental decision.
Boothroyd began a project
to compile and publish
a more accurate Hebrew text
of the Old Testament.
While he did the majority of the work,
he wasn’t alone.
My wife learned the names
of the Hebrew letters;
and we examined the sheets,
not by uttering words,
but by pronouncing
letter by letter.
Sarah helped her husband
proofread the work to confirm the accuracy.
After years of meticulous work,
they completed Boothroyd’s Biblia Hebraica
in two volumes in 1816.
Many would consider
such an accomplishment
to be the achievement of a lifetime.
But Boothroyd was about to begin
another major undertaking.
Boothroyd felt it was his duty
to produce a revised Bible in plain English,
a Bible that anyone could understand.
So with the knowledge, materials,
and means available to him,
he went back to work.
We’re now at the university in Lampeter
to find out what Boothroyd accomplished.
Just two years later, in 1818,
he published the first volume
of A New Family Bible.
The second volume was completed in 1821.
And by 1824, the entire English translation
was released.
Once again,
he hadn’t accomplished this on his own.
Through the whole
of this important and laborious work,
Mrs. Boothroyd
was my chief support and assistant,
and to her, the public
are as much indebted as myself.
A New Family Bible  was appreciated
by scholars and faithful Bible readers alike.
One thing in particular made
Boothroyd’s Bible especially significant.
Boothroyd followed
this rule while translating:
“I have adopted Jehovah  instead of Lord;
“and . . .  Jehovah  God . . .  is certainly
more proper, and just to the original
than Lord God.”
This was the first English Bible
ever published
to consistently use “Jehovah”
in the Old Testament.
Boothroyd also included it several times
in the New Testament.
The University of Glasgow
awarded Boothroyd a degree
in recognition
of this outstanding piece of scholarship.
His New Family Bible  was later used
as the basis for translating the Bible
into languages of the South Pacific,
such as Tahitian.
As a result, these too
use Jehovah’s name extensively.
Using what was available to him,
Boothroyd peered into the Scriptures,
seeking to know their meaning,
and then worked to share
that knowledge with others.
In his dedication to his New Family Bible,
he wrote:
“I have no interest to serve
but that of truth.”
This man of lowly origins
achieved something truly rare.
His works gave people
knowledge of God’s Word,
God’s will, and God’s name.
How encouraging it was
to see Boothroyd’s efforts
to help others understand God’s Word
and to restore God’s name
to the English Bible!
Through the Bible,
Jehovah also expresses his love
for another group: orphans.
He wants these dear ones
to feel especially cared for.
Let’s see how Nazar Komar,
a deaf man who was also an orphan,
came to feel Jehovah’s love.
When I was a child,
I attended a boarding school.
All of my basic needs were taken care of.
But on the weekends,
I noticed that the other kids had parents
who would take them home.
No one ever came to take me home.
They seemed so happy.
I was alone.
My name is Nazar Komar.
I was born in Kyiv, Ukraine.
And seven days after I was born,
when I was still just a baby,
my parents abandoned me.
The school principal and teachers
took turns caring for me.
But I saw the other parents
and how much they loved their children.
I really wanted to have my own parents.
I waited for them to come,
but they never did.
It was very painful.
So I decided I needed a goal to focus on.
I hoped my parents were looking for me,
and I thought playing sports
might help them find me.
They might see me
and recognize that I am their son.
I concentrated on getting good enough
to play professionally.
I learned to play very well,
but my hope always was that when
I traveled to different places,
my parents might be sitting in the stands
and they would see me and say:
“This is our son.
We found you.”
I began playing in a national league,
and the team provided me
a small room to live in
and began to pay me a salary.
It was not much
and not enough to live on.
So I also got a job working at a factory.
While working there, I met Sergei.
He was one of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
He would show me scriptures from the Bible,
like Revelation 21:3, 4,
about a future paradise
with wonderful conditions
where there would be
no more suffering or pain.
I wanted a life like that,
but I didn’t see those conditions around me.
My life was very hard.
So these promises were difficult to believe.
Sergei also showed me
God’s name in the Bible
at Exodus 15:3.
And he explained to me
the meaning of God’s name, Jehovah,
that is, He can become
whatever He chooses to become.
When I connected that name
with his promise at Revelation 21:3, 4,
it was then that I started to believe it.
At my first meeting,
I was amazed by what I saw.
The hearing and the deaf
were communicating together.
They had unity,
and they cared for each other.
I felt comfortable there.
At one of the meetings,
I saw the verse at Psalm 68:5,
which refers to Jehovah God
as the “father of the fatherless.”
I was touched.
He knows exactly
how hard it is to be an orphan.
He fully understands me.
It gave me goose bumps,
and I felt an inner peace and comfort.
When my basketball team
and the deaf community
learned that I was studying the Bible
with Jehovah’s Witnesses,
they were very upset with me.
They told me that I would lose their support
and I would lose my salary and housing.
I was at a crossroads.
Since I am an orphan,
where would I live?
This was a very difficult time.
I noticed that I didn’t feel the same unity
or connection with my team
as I did with Jehovah’s Witnesses.
So I decided to continue to study the Bible.
I gave up their support and got baptized.
Jehovah has blessed me.
I am no longer alone.
I have my own family now
—my wife, Evdokiia.
We love and cherish each other so much.
He has also given me
brothers and sisters who care about me.
They are my spiritual family.
My life is no longer full of pain.
Today, I still search for my parents
and wait for them because when I find them,
I want to help them
by telling them about God’s name.
Now I no longer consider myself an orphan
because I have a father
—my Father in heaven whose name is Jehovah!
When we search for love and acceptance
in the congregation,
we’ll find that we belong to a caring family.
Lovers of truth have sacrificed
more than time and energy.
Many have sacrificed their very lives
so that we can have God’s Word
in a language we understand.
Let’s visit the Belgium Bethel Bible museum
to learn who took such a risk and why.
Jehovah gave us the Bible
so that we could know him and love him.
He wants us to become his friends.
Jehovah made sure
that the Bible would be available
no matter where people live
or what language they speak.
The Bible museum located
at the branch office
of Jehovah’s Witnesses
in Brussels, Belgium,
with the theme “The Bible
and the Low Countries,”
tells the fascinating story
of Bible translation and production
in the coastal region
of northwestern Europe.
In this museum, you will learn
of honesthearted people
who came to love the Bible
and wanted to make it available to others.
Throughout the Middle Ages,
the Roman Catholic Church
feared the spread of Bibles
in vernacular languages.
Understanding the Bible would have exposed
the unchristian behavior of the church.
This led to cruel persecution
of Bible translators.
What role did the region
of the Low Countries play
in this overheated religious atmosphere?
By the 16th century,
the city of Antwerp, Belgium,
had become the leading commercial center
of western Europe.
Antwerp’s relatively tolerant
religious and political climate
made it an ideal hub
for translating and printing Bibles
in common, everyday languages.
About 270 printers,
publishers, and booksellers
were located in this cosmopolitan city.
In addition, the significant seaport
was perfect for smuggling Bibles
to neighboring countries.
One of the many printers
working in Antwerp
was Jacob van Liesvelt.
In 1526,
he courageously published
the first complete Bible in Dutch.
This was one of the first Bibles
printed in a single volume.
Van Liesvelt eventually printed
a total of 19 Bible editions.
Despite the comparatively safe
working conditions in Antwerp,
Bible publishers
were not fully protected from the church.
Van Liesvelt was condemned to death
for including marginal notes
in his final edition of the Dutch Bible,
notes which the Catholic Church
found offensive to their dogma.
He was one of several
Antwerp Bible printers
who were executed for their work.
A translator
who also published his work in Antwerp
was the French scholar
Jacques Lefèvre d’Étaples.
He dedicated himself
to restoring the original meaning
of ancient writings
and studied closely the Latin Vulgate  Bible.
He strongly believed
in the right of every Christian
to read and learn the Bible personally.
Therefore, Lefèvre devoted all his energy
to translating the Bible into French.
It was the first complete Bible
to be printed in this language.
He was sure the Gospels would be, as he said,
“purely proclaimed throughout the world,
“so that people may no longer be led astray
by alien doctrines of men.”
Although his Bible translation
initially was approved
by the Holy Roman Emperor Charles V,
in 1546 Lefèvre’s second edition
was placed on the Roman Catholic Church’s
Index of Forbidden Books.
Another courageous man,
one who translated
the Scriptures into English,
was a clergyman and a scholar
of Greek and Latin.
The name of this man was William Tyndale.
He was passionate about God’s Word.
Tyndale wrote: “We must also desire . . . God
“to make us understand
and feel wherefore the scripture was given,
that we may apply
the medicine of the scripture.”
For translating
the “New Testament” into English,
he was chased and hunted
by Church and State.
He sought refuge in various cities,
including the city of Antwerp.
Here he published a revised version
of the New Testament
and his translation of the Pentateuch,
where he used Jehovah’s name
for the first time
in an English translation.
Tyndale also was executed
for his translation work.
Publishing Bibles in Spain
was a very dangerous undertaking.
For this reason, in 1543,
the translator Francisco de Enzinas
had his New Testament in Spanish
also printed in Antwerp.
It was the first Spanish version
to be translated directly
from the original Greek text.
He wrote: “It seemed to me
“that I had but one task:
“to commit to the press the work
I had taken pains to produce,
“and then commend it
to God the Father of the whole business,
for whose cause it had been made.”
Francisco de Enzinas
was also arrested for his work.
Yet, some copies of his New Testament
made it to Spain.
It had a strong influence
on other Spanish translations,
such as the widely known
Reina-Valera Bible,
the first edition of which
was also printed in the Low Countries.
There are many more intriguing gems
for you to discover
in this museum,
like the Antwerp Polyglot,
which contains Bible text in five languages,
and the secretly produced
Dutch Jehovah Bible
—all printed in the Low Countries.
All these men displayed love for God’s Word,
and Jehovah blessed their efforts,
because the work that they did
set in motion a series of events
that have resulted
in God’s Word being available today
in thousands of languages.
The Bible museum in Belgium
is one of our many museums
around the world
—each highlighting unique aspects
of the fascinating history of God’s Word.
These exhibitions
deepen our appreciation for the Bible
and the truthfulness of 1 Peter 1:25,
where it says:
“The saying of Jehovah endures forever.”
The Belgium branch Bible museum
is just one of the many Bible museums
at our branch offices around the world.
If you’re able, we hope you too
will visit one of the Bible museums
at a branch office close to you.
There you’ll learn more
about the many honesthearted people
who’ve endured persecution
to publish God’s Word, the Bible.
Welcoming new ones
into the congregations brings us great joy.
But how can we help them
be firmly grounded in the truth?
Let’s listen to Brother David Schafer
explain how in the following morning worship.
So, what does it take to help someone
become firmly grounded in the truth?
Let’s focus on three things:
cooperating with divine direction,
loving the truth,
and loving people who love the truth.
Let’s go back to the year 50 C.E.
and see what we can learn
from Paul’s ministry in Macedonia.
Now, Paul began his second missionary tour
around 49 C.E. in Lystra.
He and Silas found Timothy,
whom Paul met on his first visit.
But now Timothy is ready
to accompany them on their journey.
From Map B13 in your Study Bible,
you can see that they visited Iconium
and Pisidia and Antioch.
But then you see the big purple swoop
—purple representing Paul’s second journey.
The map indicates no stops
between Antioch and Troas,
just a swoop.
What does it represent?
Obedience to divine direction.
Acts 16:8-10 tells us
that they tried to preach in Asia
but were forbidden by holy spirit.
Then they tried to preach in Bithynia,
but again Jesus used the holy spirit
to block them.
So they turned west
and went all the way to Troas on the coast.
This is where they met up with Luke,
and it’s in Troas
that they received divine direction
to step over into Macedonia.
They wasted no time.
They stepped onto a ship,
and they sailed over to Macedonia.
It’s now spring or early summer of 50 C.E.
Within a year, Paul formed congregations
in Philippi, Thessalonica, and Beroea
—cities of Macedonia.
But how did he do it?
Let’s turn to Acts chapter 17,
and here we see Paul’s love for the truth
shine through.
Acts chapter 17
and we begin in verse 1:
“They now traveled
through Amphipolis and Apollonia
“and came to Thessalonica,
“where there was a synagogue of the Jews.
“So according to Paul’s custom
he went inside to them,
“and for three sabbaths
he reasoned with them from the Scriptures,
“explaining and proving by references
“that it was necessary
for the Christ to suffer
and to rise from the dead”
—today’s text.
Well, here we see Paul
in the synagogue in Thessalonica.
He has their attention.
Why?
He’s using God’s inspired Word.
Paul loves these truths.
You can see it in his eyes.
And he’s forming an attachment
for these new disciples.
Is Jason in this picture?
Aristarchus?
Demas?
Secundus?
All those believers came from Thessalonica.
But there’s a problem.
This was not Paul’s synagogue,
and the Jews were getting jealous.
At Acts 17:5,
they begin persecuting the new believers
—persecution.
Paul had been opposed in Philippi
and now here in Thessalonica,
as he would be in Beroea as well.
In short order, he would be whisked away
from Macedonia altogether.
So to stabilize those new congregations,
Paul left Luke in Philippi,
Silas in Beroea,
and Timothy in Thessalonica.
With trained representatives
in each new congregation,
could Paul now forget about Macedonia?
Well, turn with me, please,
to 1 Thessalonians 2:17.
This is where we see
Paul’s love for the brothers.
When Timothy came to Paul in Corinth
and reported on the brothers in Thessalonica,
it moved Paul to write
what was very likely
his first inspired letter.
And in this letter,
he reveals where his heart was
—1 Thessalonians 2:17:
“When we were separated.”
That’s a powerful word
—associated with parents
bereaved of their children,
indicating the strong bond Paul felt
for his spiritual family.
“When we were separated from you, brothers,
“for just a short time
(in person, not in our hearts).”
Yes, Paul’s heart was still
with the congregation in Thessalonica.
In fact, he reveals:
“Because of our strong desire,
we made every effort to see you in person.
“For this reason we wanted to come to you,
“yes I, Paul,
tried not just once but twice;
yet Satan cut across our path.”
Well, by this point,
Paul had tried to go back twice,
but his efforts were hindered.
Would he mistake that as divine indication
that his work in Macedonia was finished?
No.
Paul knew the difference
between divine direction
and satanic opposition,
and he did not give up.
Impelled by Jehovah’s spirit,
Paul wrote this letter.
And in his love for the congregation
and with his love for the truth,
he reminds the Thessalonians of their hope.
In verse 19,
he mentions Christ’s “presence.”
In this one brief letter,
he talks about Christ’s presence
more than he would in all 13
of his other inspired letters combined.
Why?
Because these persecuted Christians
in Thessalonica
needed to be reminded of their hope.
They needed to wear it like a helmet
and let it guard their thinking.
And the encouragement worked.
So Satan used a different tactic.
Speculators tried to twist Paul’s word.
Why did he mention Christ’s presence so much?
Might this prove
that the presence has already begun?
Possibly there was even a letter
wrongly attributed to Paul
that was being interpreted to mean
that the day of Jehovah had arrived.
Well, what could Paul do about this?
He wrote his second inspired letter.
In it he admonished the brothers
not to be quickly shaken from their reason
because Jehovah’s day would “not come
unless the apostasy comes first.”
“The apostasy”
—those words completely harmonized
with Jesus’ illustration
about the wheat and the weeds,
a prophecy recorded in Matthew’s Gospel,
which had been in circulation
for nearly ten years
when Paul wrote 2 Thessalonians.
It’s also in 2 Thessalonians that we learn
that this apostasy would eventually set in
because people “did not accept
the love of the truth.”
Meanwhile, though,
Paul and the other apostles
would ‘act as a restraint’ against apostasy
by fostering love for the truth.
Yes, by Paul’s example
and constantly meditating on the Scriptures,
reasoning from them, explaining them,
and proving with references,
he equipped the brothers to withstand
the opposition they would face.
As it turns out,
Paul did return to Macedonia two more times.
And what did he find?
Strong congregations exemplary in their love,
unselfish in their generosity,
giving even beyond their actual ability.
Their example inspires Christians
to this very day.
So,
what does it take to help others
become well-grounded in the truth?
Persistence in obeying divine direction,
helping others to love the truth as we do,
and loving those who love the truth
(even when we’re separated
by circumstances),
remaining attached at heart.
May we continue to follow
this example of genuine love
as we carry out our sacred service today.
Given the world’s self-centered attitude,
we consider belonging to a spiritual family
that looks after each other
as a precious gift.
Speaking of gifts,
we have a surprise for you:
a preview of what we’ll experience
at our 2025 “Pure Worship”
Regional Convention.
Enjoy!
People have a need to worship something:
a higher power,
themselves,
other people,
money.
But how should we fill this need?
What did Jesus say?
“True worshippers . . .
must worship with spirit and truth.”
The 2025 convention of Jehovah’s Witnesses
continues the new video series
The Good News According to Jesus.
Jesus alone is qualified
to teach us how to worship God.
The benefits are personal,
immediate, and everlasting.
We’re certain you’ll thoroughly enjoy
three days of learning what it means
to give pure worship to Jehovah.
In this month’s program,
we’ve seen how Jehovah’s love
is expressed through his gift of the Bible.
We feel his love when we consider
how he preserved his Word
from ancient times until our modern day,
how he used humble people
to restore his name,
and how its message can transform lives.
This month’s music video highlights
that his Word is filled with love.
Like a letter from a loved one
that I’m reading ev’ry day,
As I turn the precious pages,
so many thoughts that come my way—
And ev’ry day that passes
gives me reason to be sure
That the things that I am reading
will comfort me some more.
Like the dew there in the morning,
Like the warmth that’s from the sun,
Like the moonlight on the water—
It’s there for ev’ryone.
Like a pillow is for comfort,
So your words can comfort me.
And as I meditate on this,
It’s easy just to see
It’s filled with love—
Jehovah’s love.
It reminds me not to worry
—that a trial will never last—
Gives me hope for the future,
helps me learn from the past.
Your promise draws me close to you
as you draw close to me.
And once again I’m thankful
for the gifts that I can see.
Like the dew there in the morning,
Like the warmth that’s from the sun,
Like the moonlight on the water—
It’s there for ev’ryone.
Like a pillow is for comfort,
So your words can comfort me.
And as I meditate on this,
It’s easy just to see
It’s filled with love—
Jehovah’s love.
Like a tree growing by a stream,
I’m stronger ev’ry day,
Building up the faith that I need.
It makes me want to share the love
that’s found right there
And just how much your Word means to me.
Like a letter from a loved one
that I’m reading ev’ry day,
As I turn the precious pages,
so many thoughts that come my way—
And ev’ry day that passes
gives me reason to be sure
That the things that I am reading
will comfort me some more.
Like the dew there in the morning,
Like the warmth that’s from the sun,
Like the moonlight on the water—
It’s there for ev’ryone.
Like a pillow is for comfort,
So your words can comfort me.
And as I meditate on this,
It’s easy just to see
It’s filled with love—
Jehovah’s love.
Our postcard this month takes us
to the beautiful country of Paraguay.
Paraguay is a landlocked country
in the heart of South America,
with a population of about seven million.
The Paraguay River runs
from north to south, dividing the country.
The east is characterized
by rolling hills and fertile fields
—some of which have red soil
and thick forests.
In contrast,
the western region has a sparse population,
coarse grass, scrub forests,
vast swamps,
and diverse colorful tropical birds.
Paraguay has two official languages:
Spanish and Guaraní.
And when the two languages mix,
you get Jopara,
which is frequently used today.
Paraguay’s theocratic history began
when Eberhard Hoeckle,
a German immigrant,
found a tract randomly sent
to his home from world headquarters.
This moved him to order
Studies in the Scriptures.
In 1906,
he and his brother-in-law
baptized each other,
becoming the first in Paraguay
to accept Bible truth.
In 1924,
Juan Muñiz,
a faithful missionary from Spain,
arrived to spread the Kingdom message
throughout several South American countries,
including Paraguay.
Then in 1934,
Brothers Martonfi, Koros, and Rebacz
entered the country
despite the ongoing Chaco War.
Their efforts paid off
when the first congregation
was formed five years later.
Decades of political instability
resulted in a decree
revoking the organization’s
legal status in 1979.
As a result,
the brothers had to conduct meetings
in small groups at private homes
or in isolated areas.
Fortunately, 12 years later, in 1991,
the organization was legally recognized
after the fall of the military regime.
Did the publishers
dwindle during those years?
Hardly!
The number of publishers doubled in size.
Today, there are over 11,000 publishers
who conduct about 10,000 Bible studies
and attend 183 congregations.
In the western part of the country,
we find the Filadelfia Español
and Loma Plata Guaraní Congregations.
The 95 publishers of these two congregations
conduct an average of 155 Bible studies
and preach in Spanish,
Guaraní, Low German,
and Nivaclé.
The Filadelfia Español
and Loma Plata Guaraní Congregations
send their love.
We love you all very much.
From the World Headquarters
of Jehovah’s Witnesses,
this is JW Broadcasting!